What's new for preview 8 (#2584)
dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/what-is-new/ef-core-5.0/whatsnew.md

For example, consider this model with a mapped hierarchy:

```c#
public class Animal
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Species { get; set; }
}

public class Pet : Animal
{
    public string Name { get; set; }
}

public class Cat : Pet
{
    public string EdcuationLevel { get; set; }
}

public class Dog : Pet
{
    public string FavoriteToy { get; set; }
}
```

By default, EF Core will map this to a single table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE [Animals] (
    [Id] int NOT NULL IDENTITY,
    [Species] nvarchar(max) NULL,
    [Discriminator] nvarchar(max) NOT NULL,
    [Name] nvarchar(max) NULL,
    [EdcuationLevel] nvarchar(max) NULL,
    [FavoriteToy] nvarchar(max) NULL,
    CONSTRAINT [PK_Animals] PRIMARY KEY ([Id])
);
```

However, mapping each entity type to a different table will instead result in one table per type:

```sql
CREATE TABLE [Animals] (
    [Id] int NOT NULL IDENTITY,
    [Species] nvarchar(max) NULL,
    CONSTRAINT [PK_Animals] PRIMARY KEY ([Id])
);

CREATE TABLE [Cats] (
    [Id] int NOT NULL,
    [EdcuationLevel] nvarchar(max) NULL,

>     CONSTRAINT [PK_Cats] PRIMARY KEY ([Id])

Reviewer: If this is going in the blog post, we may want to preemptively include the foreign key constraints here, so we don't get an unnecessary tweetstorm.

Author: I would rather not put in the blog post things that aren't in preview 8. But given I was using the wrong build, this is maybe not what is in preview 8?

If do still want to included this and this is what's generated for preview 8, then we could indicate that this is the SQL we generate in preview 8, but that it is changing in RC1.

Reviewer: Thoughts, @AndriySvyryd?

);

CREATE TABLE [Dogs] (
    [Id] int NOT NULL,
    [FavoriteToy] nvarchar(max) NULL,
    CONSTRAINT [PK_Dogs] PRIMARY KEY ([Id])
);

CREATE TABLE [Pets] (
    [Id] int NOT NULL,
    [Name] nvarchar(max) NULL,
    CONSTRAINT [PK_Pets] PRIMARY KEY ([Id])
);
```

Entity types can be mapped to different tables using mapping attributes:

```c#
[Table("Animals")]
public class Animal
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Species { get; set; }
}

[Table("Pets")]
public class Pet : Animal
{
    public string Name { get; set; }
}

[Table("Cats")]
public class Cat : Pet
{
    public string EdcuationLevel { get; set; }
}

[Table("Dogs")]
public class Dog : Pet
{
    public string FavoriteToy { get; set; }
}
```

Or using `ModelBuilder` configuration:

```c#
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
{
    modelBuilder.Entity<Animal>().ToTable("Animals");
    modelBuilder.Entity<Pet>().ToTable("Pets");
    modelBuilder.Entity<Cat>().ToTable("Cats");
    modelBuilder.Entity<Dog>().ToTable("Dogs");
}
```

Documentation is tracked by issue [#1979](https://github.com/dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs/issues/1979).

> ### Migrations: Rebuild SQLite tables

Author: @bricelam I was able to get the example to work with the daily builds, but I can't make it work with preview 8. Do we want to bump rebuilds to the rc1 what's new?

Reviewer: Weird. What’s the error? I seem to remember the bugs in preview8 being pretty corner case. But yeah, waiting for rc1 is also fine with me.

Author: Same as I got with 3.1:
```
System.NotSupportedException: SQLite does not support this migration operation ('DropColumnOperation'). For more information, see http://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/?LinkId=723262.
   at Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Migrations.SqliteMigrationsSqlGenerator.Generate(DropColumnOperation operation, IModel model, MigrationCommandListBuilder builder, Boolean terminate)
   at Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Migrations.MigrationsSqlGenerator.<>c.<.cctor>b__71_12(MigrationsSqlGenerator g, MigrationOperation o, IModel m, MigrationCommandListBuilder b)
   at Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Migrations.MigrationsSqlGenerator.Generate(MigrationOperation operation, IModel model, MigrationCommandListBuilder builder)
   at Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Migrations.MigrationsSqlGenerator.Generate(IReadOnlyList`1 operations, IModel model)
   at Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Migrations.SqliteMigrationsSqlGenerator.Generate(IReadOnlyList`1 operations, IModel model)
   at Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Migrations.Internal.Migrator.GenerateUpSql(Migration migration)
   at Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Migrations.Internal.Migrator.<>c__DisplayClass15_2.<GetMigrationCommandLists>b__2()
   at Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Migrations.Internal.Migrator.Migrate(String targetMigration)
   at Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Design.Internal.MigrationsOperations.UpdateDatabase(String targetMigration, String contextType)
   at Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Design.OperationExecutor.UpdateDatabaseImpl(String targetMigration, String contextType)
   at Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Design.OperationExecutor.UpdateDatabase.<>c__DisplayClass0_0.<.ctor>b__0()
   at Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Design.OperationExecutor.OperationBase.Execute(Action action)
```

Reviewer: Hmm, doesn’t look like any of it is in preview8

Reviewer: That sounds right, I think I missed the cutoff date by a day or two.

Author: Thanks for checking. I'll remove it here, and keep in the back pocket for rc1.

Reviewer: Well, the commit is in the branch...

Reviewer: I confirmed that this works for me on the 5.0.0-preview.8.20407.4 bits. Keep it in these release notes.

Author: What feed did you get that build from? I was using an older build.

Reviewer: *.NET 5 preview8 build* email thread from Doug.

CREATE TABLE "Unicorns" (
    "Id" INTEGER NOT NULL CONSTRAINT "PK_Unicorns" PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    "Name" TEXT NULL,
    "Age" INTEGER NOT NULL
);
```

We then learn that storing the age of a unicorn is considered very rude, so let's remove that property, add a new migration, and update the database. This update will fail when using EF Core 3.1 because the column cannot be dropped. In EF Core 5.0, Migrations will instead rebuild the table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE "ef_temp_Unicorns" (
    "Id" INTEGER NOT NULL CONSTRAINT "PK_Unicorns" PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    "Name" TEXT NULL
);

INSERT INTO "ef_temp_Unicorns" ("Id", "Name")
SELECT "Id", "Name"
FROM Unicorns;

PRAGMA foreign_keys = 0;

DROP TABLE "Unicorns";

ALTER TABLE "ef_temp_Unicorns" RENAME TO "Unicorns";

PRAGMA foreign_keys = 1;
```

Notice that:
* A temporary table is created with the desired schema for the new table
* Data is copied from the current table into the temporary table
* Foreign key enforcement is switched off
* The current table is dropped
* The temporary table is renamed to be the new table

Documentation is tracked by issue [#2583](https://github.com/dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs/issues/2583).

> ### Flexible type/function mapping

Author: @AndriySvyryd @smitpatel Could one or both of you write either one combined or multiple different sections for the issues listed below? I'm not sure quite how to approach explaining this to people.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/dotnet/efcore/issues/21415 Can be ignored, this is very low-level

```

We then learn that storing the age of a unicorn is considered very rude, so let's remove that property, add a new migration, and update the database. This update will fail when using EF Core 3.1 because the column cannot be dropped. In EF Core 5.0, Migrations will instead rebuild the table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE "ef_temp_Unicorns" (
    "Id" INTEGER NOT NULL CONSTRAINT "PK_Unicorns" PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    "Name" TEXT NULL
);

INSERT INTO "ef_temp_Unicorns" ("Id", "Name")
SELECT "Id", "Name"
FROM Unicorns;

PRAGMA foreign_keys = 0;

DROP TABLE "Unicorns";

ALTER TABLE "ef_temp_Unicorns" RENAME TO "Unicorns";

PRAGMA foreign_keys = 1;
```

Notice that:
* A temporary table is created with the desired schema for the new table
* Data is copied from the current table into the temporary table
* Foreign key enforcement is switched off
* The current table is dropped
* The temporary table is renamed to be the new table

Documentation is tracked by issue [#2583](https://github.com/dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs/issues/2583).

### Table-valued functions

This feature was contributed from the community by [@pmiddleton](https://github.com/pmiddleton). Many thanks for the contribution!

> EF Core 5.0 includes first-class support for mapping .NET methods table-valued functions (TVFs). These functions can then be used in LINQ queries where additional composition on the results of the function will also be translated to SQL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
EF Core 5.0 includes first-class support for mapping .NET methods to table-valued functions (TVFs). These functions can then be used in LINQ queries where additional composition on the results of the function will also be translated to SQL.
```

For example, consider this TVF defined in a SQL Server database:

```sql

> create FUNCTION GetReports(@employeeId int)
> RETURNS @reports TABLE
> (
> 	Name nvarchar(50) not null,
> 	IsDeveloper bit not null
> )
> AS
> begin
> 	WITH cteEmployees AS
> 	(
> 		SELECT id, name, managerId, isDeveloper
> 		FROM employees
> 		WHERE id = @employeeId
> 		UNION ALL
> 		SELECT e.id, e.name, e.managerId, e.isDeveloper
> 		FROM employees e
> 		INNER JOIN cteEmployees cteEmp ON cteEmp.id = e.ManagerId
> 	)
> 
> 	insert into @reports
> 	select name, isDeveloper
> 	FROM cteEmployees
> 	where id != @employeeId
> 
> 	return
> end

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CREATE FUNCTION GetReports(@employeeId int)
RETURNS @reports TABLE
(
	Name nvarchar(50) NOT NULL,
	IsDeveloper bit NOT NULL
)
AS
BEGIN
	WITH cteEmployees AS
	(
		SELECT Id, Name, ManagerId, IsDeveloper
		FROM Employees
		WHERE Id = @employeeId
		UNION ALL
		SELECT e.Id, e.Name, e.ManagerId, e.IsDeveloper
		FROM Employees e
		INNER JOIN cteEmployees cteEmp ON cteEmp.Id = e.ManagerId
	)

	INSERT INTO @reports
	SELECT Name, IsDeveloper
	FROM cteEmployees
	WHERE Id != @employeeId

	RETURN
END
```

Author: I left the casing as Paul had it, but I agree this aligns better with how we usually show SQL.

```

The EF Core model requires two entity types to use this TVF:
* An `Employee` type that maps to the Employees table in the normal way
* A `Report` type that matches the shape returned by the TVF

```c#
public class Employee
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Name { get; set; }
    public bool IsDeveloper { get; set; }

    public int? ManagerId { get; set; }
    public virtual Employee Manager { get; set; }
}
```

```c#
public class Report
{
    public string Name { get; set; }
    public bool IsDeveloper { get; set; }
}
```

These types must be included in the EF Core model:

```c#
modelBuilder.Entity<Employee>();
modelBuilder.Entity(typeof(Report)).HasNoKey();
```

> Notice that `Report` has no primary key and so much be configured as such.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Notice that `Report` has no primary key and it is configured as such.
```

Finally, a .NET method must be mapped to the TVF in the database. This method can be defined on the DbContext using the new `FromExpression` method:

```c#
public IQueryable<Report> GetReports(int managerId)
    => FromExpression(() => GetReports(managerId));
```

> This method uses a parameter and return type that match the TVF defined above. The is then added to the EF Core model in OnModelCreating:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This method uses a parameter and return type that match the TVF defined above. The method is then added to the EF Core model in OnModelCreating:
```

```c#

> modelBuilder.HasDbFunction(() => GetReports(0));

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modelBuilder.HasDbFunction(() => GetReports(default));
```

Author: I wondered about doing this. Probably still going to confuse some people. :-)

	)

	insert into @reports
	select name, isDeveloper
	FROM cteEmployees
	where id != @employeeId

	return
end
```

The EF Core model requires two entity types to use this TVF:
* An `Employee` type that maps to the Employees table in the normal way
* A `Report` type that matches the shape returned by the TVF

```c#
public class Employee
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Name { get; set; }
    public bool IsDeveloper { get; set; }

    public int? ManagerId { get; set; }
    public virtual Employee Manager { get; set; }
}
```

```c#
public class Report
{
    public string Name { get; set; }
    public bool IsDeveloper { get; set; }
}
```

These types must be included in the EF Core model:

```c#
modelBuilder.Entity<Employee>();
modelBuilder.Entity(typeof(Report)).HasNoKey();
```

Notice that `Report` has no primary key and so much be configured as such.

Finally, a .NET method must be mapped to the TVF in the database. This method can be defined on the DbContext using the new `FromExpression` method:

```c#
public IQueryable<Report> GetReports(int managerId)
    => FromExpression(() => GetReports(managerId));
```

> This method uses a parameter and return type that match the TVF defined above. The is then added to the EF Core model in OnModelCreating:

Reviewer 4: It is then
